>> Ifill: MARGARET THATCHER, THE
BRITISH LEADER WHO HELPED
TRANSFORM COLD WAR POLITICS, HAS
DIED.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE
REMEMBER THE "IRON LADY" IN
THREE PARTS.
FIRST, HER IMPACT AS BRITAIN'S
FIRST FEMALE PRIME MINISTER.
>> Ifill: THEN WE REVISIT A 1981
THEN WE REVIS IT A 1981
INTERVIEW WITH THATCHER AND OUR
OWN ROBERT MacNEIL AND JIM
LEER.
>> Woodruff: AND WE EXAMINE HER
LEGACY WITH TWO FORMER U.S.
SECRETARIES OF STATE, JAMES
BAKER, AND GEORGE SHULTZ.
AND FORMER CANADIAN PRIME
MINISTER TIM CAMPBELL.
>> Ifill: AS CONGRESS GRAPPLES
WITH GUN LEGISLATION WE LOOK AT
SEVERAL STATES' EFFORTS TO PASS
GUN LAWS OF OF THEIR OWN.
>> Woodruff: WITH CLOSE WITH
ANOTHER LEGACY OF THE COLD WAR
WITH REPORTS FROM GERM ANSWER ON
NEW EFFORTS TO PROTECT WHAT
REMAINS OF THE BERLIN WALL.
>> ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WALL
HAVE SHIFTED IN THE LAST TWO
DECADES.
NOW MANY GERMANS WANT TO
PRESERVE IT.
SO THE MISTAKES OF THE PAST
WON'T BE REPEATED.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: BRITAIN AND THE WORLD
MARKED THE PASSING OF FORMER
PRIME MINISTER MARGARET THATCHER
TODAY.
SHE WAS THE FIRST WOMAN TO LEAD
ANY MAJOR WESTERN POWER, AND
BECAME A TRANSFORMATIONAL FIGURE
AT HOME AND ABROAD.
MARGARET WARNER BEGINS OUR
COVERAGE.
>> Warner: BRITAIN'S LONGEST
SERVING PRIME MINISTER OF THE
20th CENTURY DIEDED THIS
MORNING AFTER SUFFERING A
STROKE.
FLAGS AT NUMBER 10 DOWNING
STREET AND BUCKINGHAM PALACE
WERE LOWERED TO HALF STAFF.
AS AN IMPROMPTU MEMORIAL
APPEARED OUTSIDE HER LONDON
HOME.
HONORING THE STEELY WOMAN WHO
HAD TRANSFORMED HER NATION'S
ECONOMY AND POLITICS AND
REASSERTED ITS VOICE IN THE
WORLD.
CURRENT PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON, LIKE THATCHER, A
CONSERVATIVE, REFLECTED ON HER
LEGACY.
>> AS OUR FIRST WOMAN PRIME
MINISTER, MARGARET THATCHER
SUCCEEDED AGAINST ALL THE ODDS,
AND THE REAL THING ABOUT
MARGARET THATCHER IS THAT SHE
DIDN'T JUST LEAD OUR COUNTRY;
SHE SAVED OUR COUNTRY.
AND I BELIEVE SHE'LL GO DOWN AS
THE GREATEST BRITISH PEACETIME
PRIME MINISTER.
>> Warner: THATCHER CAME FROM
HUMBLE BEGINNINGS, THE DAUGHTER
OF A GROCER IN CENTRAL ENGLAND.
YET SHE ROSE THROUGH
CONSERVATIVE PARTY RANKS,
WINNING A SEAT TO PARLIAMENT IN
1959 AND LATER SERVING AS
MINISTER OF EDUCATION.
THEN IN 1979, AFTER YEARS OF
LABOR PARTY DOMINATION, THATCHER
LED A TORY RESURGENCE THAT
CATAPULTED HER TO THE OFFICE OF
PRIME MINISTER, A POST SHE HELD
FOR MORE THAN 11 YEARS.
>> WHERE THERE IS DISCOURSE, MAY
WE BRING HARMONY.
WHERE THERE IS ERROR MAY WE
BRING TRUTH.
WHERE THERE IS DOUBT, MAY WE BE
BRING.
AND MAY WE BRING HOPE.
>> Warner: SHE BROUGHT A FREE
MARKET REVOLUTION TO BRITAIN,
LOWERING TAXES AND PRIVATIZING
STATE INDUSTRIES.
IN THE EARLY 1980s, SHE CURBED
THE SWEEPING POWERS OF BRITAIN'S
LABOR UNIONS AND TRIGGERED A
YEAR-LONG DISPUTE WITH THE THE
AFTER
SHE SHUTTERED GOVERNMENT-OWNED
COAL MINES ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> WHAT WE'VE GOT IS AN ATTEMPT
TO SUBSTITUTE THE RULE OF THE
MOB FOR THE RULE OF LAW.
AND IT MUST NOT.
>> Warner: BRITAIN'S ECONOMY
REBOUNDED FROM HER TOUGH
MEDICINE AND FOR HER LEADERSHIP
STYLE SHE WAS DUBBED THE IRON
LADY.
SHE CLEARLY REVELED IN IT.
>> FOR THOSE WAITING WITH BAITED
BREATH FOR THAT THE U-TURN, I
HAVE ONLY ONE THING TO SAY.
U-TURN IF YOU WANT TO.
THE LADY IS NOT TURNING.
>> Warner: BUT HER UNYIELDING
POLICIES ROUSED MORE THAN
POLITICAL HOSTILITY.
THE IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY BOMBED
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY IN
BRIGHTON IN A BID TO ASSASSINATE
HER.
YEARS LATER IN THE 1996
DOCUMENTARY, THATCHER MAINTAINED
NONE OF THE CRITICISM EVER
BOTHERED HER.
>> LIFE ISN'T FAIR.
THERE'S NO POINT IN GETTING TO A
SENSE OF IT IF YOU'RE IN
POLITIC.
YOU HAVE TO KNOW WHAT YOU'RE
DOING CAN BE JUSTIFIED BY
PRINCIPLE, BY ARGUMENT, AND TO
PUT IT ACROSS.
THAT'S THE IMPORTANT THING.
>> Warner: SHE WAS JUST AS HARD
NOSED IN ASSERTING BRITAIN'S
INFLUENCE ABROAD.
IN 1982 SHE ORDERED BRITISH
FORCES TO RECLAIM THE TALK
LANDS.
AFTER ARGENTINA'S MILITARY HUNTA
INVADED THE ISLANDS.
THE WAR LEFT ABOUT 2555 BRITONS
DEAD BUT IT EARNED THATCHER HUGE
SUPPORT AT HOME.
IN WASHINGTON, SHE FOUND A
KINDRED SPIRIT IN PRESIDENT
RALDON REAGAN, SHARING HER
HARDER LINE TOWARD THE SOVIET
UNION IN THE CLIMACTIC FINAL
YEARS OF THE COLD WAR.
ETY WHEN THATCHER MET WITH
INCOMING SOVIET LEADER MIKHAIL
GORBACHEV IN LATE 1984 SHE
FAMOUSLY DECLARED THAT "WE CAN
DO BUSINESS WITH HIM."
FIVE YEARS LATER SHE WAS IN
POWER WHEN THE BERLIN WALL CAME
DOWN.
IN 1990 WHEN IRAQ INVADED KUWAIT
THATCHER BACKED A TOUGH RESPONSE
URGING PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
BUSH NOT TO GO WOBBLY ON
CONFRONTING SADDAM HUSSEIN.
BUT BACK HOME, THATCHER'S OWN
GRIP ON POWER WAS WOBBLING AFTER
11 YEARS IN OFFICE HER PUBLIC
SUPPORT FLAGGED AMID INFLATION
AND RENEWED RECESSION.
AND THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY VOTED
HER OUT.
>> AFTER 11-AND-A-HALF WONDERFUL
YEARS.
>> Warner: EVEN AFTER HER FALL
FROM POWER THATCHER OFTEN DREW
LARGE CROWDS AT CAMPAIGN EVENTS.
NEARLY UPSTAGING HER SUCCESSOR
JOHN MAJOR AT A CONSERVATIVE
PARTY CONFERENCE IN 1992.
THAT SAME YEAR SHE WAS NAMED A
BARONESS.
FOR MANY OF THE '90s SHE MADE
LUCRATIVE LECTURE TOURS.
MARGARET THATCHER'S WITHDRAWAL
FROM PUBLIC EYE BEGAN IN 2002
WHEN A SERIES OF SMALL STROKES
PROMPTED HER TO CUT BACK ON
PUBLIC APPEARANCES AND SPEAKING
EVENTS.
IT WAS THE FIRST OF MANY HEALTH
PROBLEMS, INCLUDING A STRUGGLE
WITH DEMENTIA THAT SHADOWED HER
LATER YEARS.
FOR A TIME THATCHER DID CONTINUE
TO APPEAR AT SELECT PRIVATE
EVENTS AND STATE FUNCTIONS.
AND IN THE SUMMER OF 2004 SHE
RETURNED TO THE UNITED STATES
FOR THE FUNERAL OF FORMER
PRESIDENT REAGAN THOUGH SHE PAID
HER RESPECTS IN A PRERECORDED
VIDEO.
>> WE HAVE LOST A GREAT
PRESIDENT, A GEATR AMERICAN, AND
A GREAT MAN.
AND I HAVE LOST A DEAR FRIEND.
>> Warner: IN 2005 THATCHER WAS
WELL ENOUGH TO ATTEND HER
80th BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION AT
A LONDON HOTEL.
IN 2007 THE UNVEILING OF HER
STATUE IN THE HOUSES OF
PARLIAMENT.
IN 2010 SHE MADE ONE OF HER LAST
VISITS TO 10 DOWNING STREET AT
THE INVITATION OF PRIME MINISTER
DAVID CAMERON.
AFTER THAT, AS DEPICTED IN THE
2011 MOVIE, THE IRON LADY, HER
DISSENT INTO DEMENTIA KEPT HER
LARGELY SHUT IN.
TODAY QUEEN ELIZABETH AUTHORIZED
A CEREMONIAL FUNERAL WITH
MILITARY HONORS FOR THE FORMER
PRIME MINISTER AT ST. PAUL'S
CATHEDRAL IN LONDON.
MARGARET THATCHER WAS 87 YEARS
OLD.
>> Woodruff: AND WE HAVE MUCH
MORE ABOUT MARGARET THATCHER
COMING UP, INCLUDING HER
INTERVIEW WITH MacNEIL AND
LEHRER; PLUS, SECRETARIES BAKER
AND SCHULTZ ON HER LEGACY TODAY.
ALSO AHEAD, HOW STATES ARE
TACKLING GUNS, AND NEW EFFORTS
TO PROTECT THE BERLIN WALL.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: A SUICIDE BOMBER
IN SYRIA BLEW UP HIS CAR IN
DAMASCUS TODAY, KILLING AT LEAST
15 PEOPLE.
IT HAPPENED IN THE CITY'S
FINANCIAL DISTRICT.
RESCUE WORKERS SEARCHED THE
SMOKING WRECKAGE FOR SURVIVORS.
THE STATE NEWS AGENCY SAID THE
BLAST WOUNDED 14PEOP6 LE.
OTHER REPORTS HAD THAT NUMBER AT
53.
THE BODY OF AN AMERICAN DIPLOMAT
KILLED IN AFGHANISTAN WAS FLOWN
BACK TO DOVER AIR FORCE BASE IN
DELAWARE TODAY FOR A PRIVATE
CEREMONY.
25-YEAR-OLD ANNE SMEDINGHOFF WAS
ONE OF FIVE AMERICANS WHO DIED
IN A SUICIDE BOMBING ON
SATURDAY.
THE GROUP WAS DELIVERING
TEXTBOOKS TO SCHOOL CHILDREN IN
THE SOUTHERN CITY OF ZABUL.
THE TALIBAN CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK.
NORTH KOREA HAS CUT ITS LAST
MAJOR TIES TO THE SOUTH,
SUSPENDING OPERATIONS AT A JOINT
INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX.
IT WAS THE LATEST NORTH KOREAN
MOVE THAT'S RAISED TENSIONS IN
THE REGION.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JULIET BREMNER OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Reporter: THE LATEST
RATCHETING UP OF NORTH KOREAN
RHETORIC.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT ON THE STATE
NEWS THAT ALL WORKERS WILL BE
CALLED OUT OF THE INDUSTRIAL
ZONE JOINTLY RUN WITH THE SOUTH.
THE COMPLEX IS JUST ABOUT THE
ONLY PLACE WHERE THE FRACTIOUS
NEIGHBORS CONTINUE TO COOPERATE.
AS WORKERS WERE PULLED OUT, IT
WAS SEEN AS SELF-DEFEATING FOR
THE NORTH WHO RELY ON THE
REVENUE.
BUT IT IS ANOTHER SIGN OF THEIR
DEFIANCE.
AT THIS TIME OF HEIGHTENED
TENSIONS, EVERY ACTION, EVERY
WORD HAS POTENTIALLY DEVASTATING
CONSEQUENCES.
DOGS ON TRAINING MANEUVERS WITH
NORTH KOREAN SOLDIERS... WAS
FORCED TO RETRACT EARLIER
WARNINGS THAT THE NORTH MAY BE
ON THE VERGE OF CARRYING OUT
ANOTHER NUCLEAR ATTACK.
THE SOUTH WHO HAVE MOVED THEIR
MILITARY HARDWARE UP TO THE
BORDER RAPIDLY MODIFIED THEIR
STATEMENT SAYING THAT ACTIVITY
AROUND THE UNDERGROUND TEST SITE
DIDN'T AMOUNT TO EVIDENCE THAT A
FOURTH TEST WAS IMMINENT.
BUT IT IS CAUSING INCREASED
ANXIETY AMONGST THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
THE U.N. SECRETARY GENERAL
CALLING THE LATEST NORTH KOREAN
MOVE PROVOCATIVE.
>> I SINCERELY HOPE THAT THEY
WILL FULLY COMPLY WITH THE
RESOLUTIONS.
FROM THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
INCLUDING MYSELF.
>> Reporter: BUT NO ONE CAN BE
CERTAIN JUST HOW FAR THE NEW
YOUNG LEADER WILL PUSH HIS
DEMANDS FOR INTERNATIONAL
SANCTIONS TO BE RELAXED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE WEB SITE
WIKILEAKS STAGED A MAJOR NEW
DOCUMENT DUMP TODAY, EVEN AS
FOUNDER JULIAN ASSANGE REMAINS
HOLED UP IN LONDON.
THE SITE RELEASED SOME 1.7
MILLION U.S. GOVERNMENT FILES
FROM 1973 THROUGH 1976.
THEY INCLUDE A HOST OONCEF -
SECRET MEMOS WRITTEN BY THEN-
SECRETARY OF STATE HENRY
KISSINGER.
IN WASHINGTON, A SPOKESMAN SAID
WIKILEAKS WANTS M
>> ONE FORM OF SECRECY IS THE
COMPLEXITY AND THE
INACCESSIBILITY OF DOCUMENTS.
IT SEEMS TO BE THAT THE CURRENT
GOVERNMENT IS NOT MAKING A HUGE
EFFORT I THESE
HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS ACCESSIBLE.
IN THIS WAY WE ARE PROVIDING A
PUBLIC SERVICE.
>> Sreenivasan: ASSANGE APPEARED
AT THE BRIEFING VIA SKYPE FROM
THE ECUADORIAN EMBASSY IN
LONDON.
HE SOUGHT ASYLUM THERE LAST JUNE
TO EVADE EXTRADITION TO SWEDEN
ON SEX CRIME ALLEGATIONS.
THERE WAS NEW FALLOUT TODAY IN A
SPORTS SCANDAL AT RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY.
THE SCHOOL FIRED BASKETBALL
COACH MIKE RICE LAST WEEK AFTER
A VIDEO SHOWED HIM SHOVING
PLAYERS AND USING GAY SLURS.
NOW, RUTGERS HAS ANNOUNCED AN
INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF RICE'S
CONDUCT AND THE UNIVERSITY'S
INITIAL RESPONSE.
THE SCHOOL PRESIDENT SAID HE IS
ALSO REVIEWING PRACTICE VIDEOS
OF OTHER SPORTS.
AN ANNUAL REPORT CARD ON U.S.
AIRLINES SHOWS THEY'VE TURNED IN
THEIR SECOND BEST PERFORMANCE IN
THE 23 YEARS THEY'VE BEEN
TRACKED.
ON-TIME PERFORMANCE IN 2012 WAS
UP OVER A YEAR EARLIER, AND
MISHANDLED BAGGAGE RATES WERE
DOWN.
EVEN SO, CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS
ROSE, ESPECIALLY OVER SHRINKING
SEATS AND OVERBOOKED PLANES.
VIRGIN AMERICA HAD THE BEST
OVERALL PERFORMANCE; UNITED
AIRLINES HAD THE WORST.
THE U.S. SENATE CONFIRMED MARY
JO WHITE TODAY, AS CHAIR OF THE
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION.
SHE'S A FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR IN NEW YORK.
AND ON WALL STREET, STOCKS
STARTED THE WEEK ON A HIGH NOTE.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 48 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,613.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 18 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3222.
FORMER MOUSEKETEER AND TEEN
MOVIE STAR ANNETTE FUNICELLO
DIED TODAY.
SHE PASSED AWAY AT A HOSPITAL IN
BAKERSFIELD, CALIFORNIA, OF
COMPLICATIONS FROM MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS.
FUNICELLO FIRST GAINED FAME ON
TV'S "MICKEY MOUSE CLUB" IN THE
LATE 1950's, AND THEN, IN
SEVERAL DISNEY FILMS.
LATER, SHE TEAMED WITH FRANKIE
AVALON IN A SERIES OF "BEACH"
MOVIES IN THEARLY E '60s.
ANNETTE FUNICELLO WAS 70 YEARS
OLD.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN TO MARGARET
THATCHER AND LOOK BACK TO OUR
PROGRAM'S ARCHIVE.
WHEN SHE SAT DOWN WITH THE
NEWSHOUR'S FOUNDERS, ROBERT
MacNEIL AND JIM LEHRER, THEY GOT
A TASTE OF THE STEELY RESOLVE OF
THE "IRON LADY" WHEN THEY
ATTEMPTED TO ASK HER REPEATEDLY
ABOUT THE NEWS OF THAT DAY WHICH
HAPPENED TO BE EL SALVADOR.
HERE ARE EXCERPTS FROM THE 1981
INTERVIEW.
>> GOOD EVENING FROM WASHINGTON.
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER MARGARET
THATCHER FINISHED TWO DAYS OF
TALKS TODAY WITH PRESIDENT
REAGAN AND U.S. OFFICIALS.
IMPRESSED, SHE SAID, WITH THE
STRIKING SIMILARITY BETWEEN OUR
AIMS AND POLICIES.
MRS. THATCHER IS THE FIRST MAJOR
ALLIED LEADER TO VISIT THE NEW
PRESIDENT.
EARLIER THIS AFTERNOON, JIM LEER
AND I DISCUSSED SOME OF THESE
ISSUES WITH MRS. THATCHER AT
BLAIR HOUSE.
>> A SHORT WHILE AGO IT WAS
ANNOUNCED THAT YOU ARE DELAYING
YOUR DEPARTURE FROM WASHINGTON
IN THE MORNING TO HAVE A SPECIAL
UNSCHEDULED SECOND SESSION WITH
PRESIDENT REAGAN.
HAS SOMETHING URGENT ARISEN,
SOMETHING SPECIAL OR WHAT?
>> NO.
I I THINK IT'S A LOVELY IDEA.
MY HUSBAND AND ME TO GO AROUND
TO THE WHITE HOUSE TO SAY
GOOD-BYE AND TO SAY HOW VERY
MUCH WE'VE ENJOYED THE TRIP.
>> WE WERE AFRAID THAT MAYBE
SOMETHING HAD COME UP ON EL
SALVADOR OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
THAT'S NOT THE CASE.
>> I DON'T THINK WE WOULD BE SO
HAM-HANDED TO DO THAT WAY IF IT
HAD.
>> IN YOUR CONVERSATIONS WITH
THE PRESIDENT, SECRETARY HAGAN
OTHERS, WITH A FULL RANGE OF
OPTIONS THAT COULD BE EMPLOYED
TO STOP THIS OUTSIDE
INTERFERENCE, WERE THEY GONE
OVER WITH YOU?
>> NO.
ACTUALLY THE PROPORTION OF
QUESTIONS I'VE HAD ON EL
SALVADOR FROM INTERVIEWERS FAR
EXCEEDS THE PROPORTION OF TIME
WE SPENT ON DISCUSSING THIS
PARTICULAR MATTER.
>> WHY DIDN'T YOU SPEND MORE
TIME TALKING ABOUT EL SALVADOR.
>> BECAUSE THERE WERE A LOT OF
OTHER THINGS TO TALK ABOUT AS
WELL.
>> IT'S NOT THAT IMPORTANT THEN
IN THE TOTAL SCHEME OF THINGS?
>> NO, I THINK YOU'RE TRYING TO
GROPE FOR SOMETHING FOR SOME
MEANING THAT ISN'T THERE.
>> WE DON'T WANT TO DEVOTE A
FANTASTIC AMOUNT OF TIME TO IT
BUT I WOULD LIKE TO GROPE A
LITTLE FURTHER.
>> GROPE AWAY.
I ASSURE YOU I'M VERY GOOD, YOU
KNOW, AT GIVING YOU THE ANSWER I
WANT TO GIVE.
>> I'M SURE.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
LEGACY OF MARGARET THATCHER, I'M
JOINED BY TWO FORMER SECRETARIES
OF STATE WHO WORKED EXTENSIVELY
WITH THE BRITISH PRIME MINISTER,
GEORGE SCHULTZ SERVED UNDER
PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN, AND
JAMES BAKER SERVED UNDER
PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W. BUSH.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
SECRETARY SHULTZ, LET ME BEGIN
WITH YOU.
YOU WORKED IN THAT POSITION FOR
SEVEN YEARS UNDER RONALD REAGAN.
SO YOU WORKED WITH HER AS MUCH
AS IF NOT MORE THAN ANYONE ELSE
IN GOVERNMENT AT THAT TIME.
WHAT WAS SHE LIKE?
>> SHE WAS VERY CLEAR.
VERY WELL INFORMED.
SHE WAS... LOVED TO HAVE A GOOD
DISCUSSION.
SHE DIDN'T LIKE IT IF YOU
TOADIED TO HER.
SHE LIKED IT WHEN YOU STOOD UP
AND ARGUED SO THAT'S WHAT I DID.
YOUR INTERVIEW CLIP WITH
McNEIL AND LEHRER REMINDED ME
OF A TIME WHEN SHE HAD BEEN IN
CAMP DAVID AND I FLEW DOWN WITH
HER TO ANDREWS AIR FORCE BASE TO
SEE HER OFF.
AND AT THE BASE, THERE WAS A
NEWS INTERVIEW.
AND SHE STOOD THERE AND
REPORTERS WOULD ASK THESE
QUESTIONS, AND SHE WOULD SAY,
NOW, THAT'S NOT A VERY GOOD
QUESTION.
IF YOU HAD FORMED IT LIKE THIS,
THEN THAT WOULD BE SOMETHING OF
A QUESTION WORTH ANSWERING.
AND HERE'S THE ANSWER TO THE
QUESTION YOU SHOULD HAVE ASKED.
SHE DID THAT A FEW TIMES.
THEN THERE WEREN'T ANY MORE
QUESTIONS.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY BAKER,
YOU, OF COURSE, NOT ONLY
INTERACTED WITH HER IN THE FIRST
BUSH ADMINISTRATION AS SECRETARY
OF STATE.
YOU OF COURSE WERE ALSO WHITE
HOUSE CHIEF OF STAFF, TREASURY
SECRETARY UNDER PRESIDENT
REAGAN.
SO YOU INTERACTED WITH HER IN
SEVERAL DIFFERENT CAPACITIES.
WHAT DO YOU REMEMBER ABOUT HER?
>> WELL, I REMEMBER HOW STRONG
AND DETERMINED A LEADER SHE WAS.
I REMEMBER WHAT A GREAT FRIEND
OF THE UNITED STATES SHE WAS.
I REMEMBER HOW SHE IN EFFECT LED
A CONSERVATIVE REVOLUTION IN A
NUMBER OF COUNTRIES BY BEING
ELECTED IN 1979 IN THE UNITED
KINGDOM JUST BEFORE RONALD
REAGAN WAS ELECTED IN 1980 IN
AMERICA.
AND YOU HAD THE ELECTION OF
CONSERVATIVE LEADERS IN GERMANY
WITH HELMUT KOHL AND CANADA WITH
BRIAN MULRONEY OR CONTEMPORANEOY
THERE WITH SO IT WAS QUITE A
CONSERVATIVE REVOLUTION IN
GOVERNMENTS AROUND THE WORLD.
I AGREE WITH WHAT GEORGE SAID.
SHE REALLY DIDN'T MIND IT AT ALL
IF YOU ARGUED WITH HER.
IF YOU ENGAGED OR JOUSTED WITH
HER ON POLICY.
AND WE DID... WE HAD TO DO THAT
AS WELL FROM TIME TO TIME.
I NEVER WILL FORGET AN INCIDENT
IN THE OVAL OFFICE WHEN WE WERE
TRYING TO CONVINCE HER THAT WE
SHOULD GO TO THE UNITED NATIONS
TO GET A RESOLUTION OF FORCE
AUTHORIZING THE EJECTION OF IRAQ
FROM KUWAIT.
WE DIDN'T HAVE THE SUPPORT OF
THE CONGRESS.
WE HAD A DEMOCRATIC HOUSE AND A
DEMOCRATIC SENATE.
AND IT WAS OUR VIEW THAT IF WE
GOT THE REST OF THE WORLD BEHIND
THIS EFFORT, WE COULD THEN GET
THE AMERICAN CONGRESS WHICH
PROVED TO BE THE CASE.
BUT SHE DIDN'T WANT TO GO TO THE
U.N. BECAUSE SHE WAS AFRAID WE
MIGHT GO FOR THE RESOLUTION AND
NOT GET IT.
OF COURSE, OUR PLAN WAS NEVER TO
BRING IT UP UNLESS WE KNEW WE
HAD THE VOTES TO GET IT.
I WILL NEVER FORGET HER SITTING
THERE AFTER 45 MINUTES OF
DISCUSSING THIS ISSUE, SHE
TURNED TO PRESIDENT BUSH AND SHE
SAID, OH, GEORGE, LET'S JUST GO
DO IT.
WELL, I CAN UNDERSTAND THAT IS
HER VIEW OF ARTICLE 51 OF THE
U.N. CHARTER GAVE US THE
AUTHORITY AND IT PROBABLY DID
BUT WE NEEDED THE POLITICAL
SUPPORT.
WE WANTED TO HAVE AND WERE ABLE
TO ULTIMATELY TO ACHIEVE THAT
UNPRECEDENTED INTERNATIONAL
COALITION TO KICK IRAQ OUT OF
KUWAIT.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY SHULTZ,
WHAT WAS SHE LIKE IN THOSE
SITUATIONS?
WHAT WAS SHE LIKE AS A PARTNER,
AS SOMEONE WHO, I ASSUME THE
ADMINISTRATION AGREED WITH MUCH
OF THE TIME BUT MAYBE NOT ALL
THE TIME.
>> WELL, SHE WAS A PERSON WITH
WHOM YOU COULD REALLY DISCUSS A
SUBJECT IN DEPTH.
BECAUSE SHE HAD DONE HER
HOMEWORK.
SHE HAD THOUGHT ABOUT THE THINGS
THAT WE WERE INTERESTED IN.
AND SO YOU ALWAYS COULD LEARN
SOMETHING FROM TALKING WITH HER.
AND YOU COULD SEE THAT HER MIND
WAS OPEN TO LEARNING WHATEVER
YOU HAD TO SAY.
EVERY TIME I WENT TO THE SOVIET
UNION I SHARED WITH HER DIRECTLY
WHAT IMPRESSIONS I HAD.
WHENEVER SHE HAD ANY CONTACTS
SHE LET US KNOW RIGHT AWAY WHAT
HER OBSERVATIONS WERE.
SO SHE WAS REALLY AN EXCELLENT
PARTNER.
BUT SHE COULD ALSO GIVE YOU
WHAT-FOR.
I REMEMBER WHEN THE BIG
REAGAN-GORBACHEV MEETING IN
REYJAVIK TOOK PLACE.
AT THAT MEETING WE TALKED ABOUT
THE POSSIBILITY OF A WORLD FREE
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
I HAD HARDLY GOTTEN BACK TO
WASHINGTON WHEN I WAS SUMMONED
TO THE BRITISH AMBASSADOR'S
RESIDENCE, PRACTICALLY SUMMONED
TO MEET WITH MARGARET.
AND YOU REMEMBER SHE USED TO
CARRY A LITTLE HANDBAG.
WELL, I LEARNED THAT THERE'S A
VERB IN THE BRITISH LANGUAGE
CALLED TO-BE-HANDBAGGED.
SHE SAID, GEORGE, HOW COULD YOU
SIT THERE AND ALLOW THE
PRESIDENT TO TALK ABOUT A WORLD
FREE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS?
I SAID, BUT, MARGARET, HE'S THE
PRESIDENT.
"YES, BUT YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
THE ONE WITH HIS FEET ON THE
GROUND."
"BUT, MARGARET, I AGREED WITH
HIM."
BOY, DID I GET IT.
SHE HAD VERY CLEAR VIEWS AND SHE
MADE THEM KNOWN TO YOU.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY BAKER,
WHAT WAS HER INFLUENCE ON
PRESIDENT REAGAN AND ON THE
FIRST PRESIDENT BUSH?
TO WHAT EXTENT DID SHE MAKE IT
EASIER ESPECIALLY FOR PRESIDENT
REAGAN TO DEAL WITH THE SOVIETS,
TO OPEN...
>> WELL, SHE MADE... I THINK SHE
MADE IT MUCH EASIER FOR BOTH
PRESIDENT REAGAN AND PRESIDENT
BUSH TO DO SO BY EARLY ON
COMMENTING, YOU KNOW, THAT AFTER
SHE MET WITH GORBACHEV SHE SAID,
YOU KNOW, THIS IS SOMEBODY THAT
I THINK WE CAN DO BUSINESS WITH.
WELL, THAT MADE IT A LOT EASIER
FOR A REPUBLICAN PRESIDENT TO
ENGAGE WITH THE SOVIET UNION
SOMETHING THAT THE VERY
CONSERVATIVE BASE OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY WAS NOT
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT.
IF YOU HAD THE IRON LADY SAYING
THIS IS SOMEONE WE CAN DO
BUSINESS WITH, IT MADE IT A LOT
EASIER FOR BOTH OF THOSE
PRESIDENTS TO ENGAGE.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WE'VE MENTIONED A
COUPLE OF INSTANCES WHERE THERE
WERE A MINOR DISAGREEMENTS.
FOR THE MOST PART, EVERYTHING
WAS PRETTY MUCH SEAMLESS BETWEEN
PRIME MINISTER THATCHER AND BOTH
OF THOSE PRESIDENTS.
REAGAN AND BUSH.
I DO REMEMBER ONE OCCASION,
GEORGE WILL REMEMBER THIS, WHEN
WE WERE ABOUT TO INVADE GRENADE
A, THE FIRST NAME THE UNITED
STATES HAD USED FORCE SINCE THE
VIETNAM WAR, MILITARY FORCE.
WE, THEREFORE, WERE HOLDING IT
PRETTY CLOSE.
WE CALLED THE PRIME MINISTER THE
NIGHT BEFORE THE OPERATION WAS
TO GO DOWN, AND I WAS ON THE
PHONE TAKING NOTES WHILE
PRESIDENT REAGAN TALKED TO HER.
HE TOLD HER THAT TOMORROW
MORNING WE'RE GOING TO INVADE
GREN KNOWED A, THAT WAS A
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRY.
SHE THOUGHT WE SHOULD HAVE
CALLED HER WHILE WE WERE
DEVELOPING THE PLANS, NOT AFTER
THEY WERE IN TRAIN, IN EFFECT.
SHE SAID, RONNIE, THIS IS
NOTIFICATION NOT CONSULTATION.
SHE WAS NOT A HAPPY CAMPER.
BUT THAT JUST SHOWS YOU, I
THINK, THAT SHE WAS... SHE FELT
FREE TO SPEAK HER MIND BUT FOR
THE MOST PART AND IN MOST
INSTANCES SHE WAS 100% WITH THE
UNITED STATES ON PRACTICALLY
EVERY ISSUE.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY SHUTLE,
HOW MUCH DID IT MATTER THAT SHE
WAS A WOMAN?
>> SHE WAS A VERY ATTRACTIVE
WOMAN.
SO YOU WERE CERTAINLY AWARE OF
THAT.
BUT IT DIDN'T SORT OF FEEL I'M
DEALING WITH A WOMAN AND THERE'S
SOMETHING SPECIAL ABOUT HER.
SHE WAS JUST STRAIGHTFORWARD.
A STRAIGHTFORWARD PERSON.
BUT I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE A
COMMENT ON THE ATTITUDE TOWARD
THE SOVIETS.
SHE AND RONALD REAGAN SHARED
SOMETHING THAT WAS NOT WIDELY
SHARED.
BUT IT MADE A BIG DIFFERENCE.
THEY WERE BO
TOUGH-MINDED.
THEY BOTH THOUGHT THAT IF YOU
KEPT THE PRESSURE ON LONG
ENOUGH, CHANGE WOULD COME TO THE
SOVIET UNION.
THAT'S THE UNDERLYING
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE REMARK JIM
QUOTED ON GORBACHEV IS SOMEBODY
WE CAN DO BUSINESS WITH.
YOU DIDN'T JUST SIT THERE AND
ASSUME NOTHING COULD EVER
CHANGE.
YOU SAT THERE AND YOU HAD A HARD
LINE BUT AT THE SAME TIME WHEN
WE SAW THE OPPORTUNITY TO
DEVELOP CHANGE, WE SEIZED IT.
AS JIM INDICATED, THAT WAS NOT
THE VIEW OF A LOT OF
CONSERVATIVE PEOPLE.
BUT THE VIEW THAT CHANGE COULD
COME TURNED OUT TO BE RIGHT.
SHE AND RONALD REAGAN SHARED
THAT VIEW.
>> Woodruff: AND SO, SECRETARY
BAKER, HOW MUCH OF THAT WAS HER
LEGACY?
WHAT IS THE LEGACY THAT SHE
LEAVES?
>> WELL, I THINK SHE... I REALLY
THINK IT'S NOT A STRETCH TO SAY
THAT SHE CHANGED THE ARC OF
HISTORY.
SHE CERTAINLY DID AS FAR AS THE
U.K. IS CONCERNED.
I THINK WORKING WITH PRESIDENT
REAGAN AND WORKING WITH
PRESIDENT BUSH 41, SHE CHANGED
THE ARC OF HISTORY AS FAR AS THE
WORLD IS CONCERNED.
I MEAN, YOU THINK ABOUT THE
DEVELOPMENTS THAT TOOK PLACE
DURING THAT, I GUESS, TEN-YEAR
PERIOD, SHE CAME IN IN '79 AND
LEFT IN '90.
11 YEARS.
LOOK AT THE CHANGE THAT TOOK
PLACE.
IT WAS FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE IN
MANY, MANY.  .. WITH RESPECT TO
MANY THINGS AROUND THE WORLD.
SO I DON'T THINK IT'S A STRETCH
TO SAY SHE CHANGED THE ARC OF
HISTORY.
I HAD THE PRIVILEGE OF DEALING
WITH HER NOT ONLY IN DIPLOMATIC
AND PLIT CALGARY MATTERS...
POLITICAL MATTERS, BUT ALSO
ECONOMIC MATTERS BECAUSE I WAS
TREASURY SECRETARY FOR ALMOST
FOUR YEARS WHILE SHE WAS PRIME
MINISTER.
AND I DEALT WITH HER IN THAT
CAPACITY.
OF COURSE SHE LEFT A LEGACY
THERE AS WELL, PARTICULARLY IN
THE U.K. WHERE SHE EMPHASIZED
THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND GOT RID
OF THE OPPRESSIVE INFLUENCE OF
THE TRADE UNION.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY SHULTZ,
THAT WAS A CONTROVERSIAL PART OF
HER LEGACY.
HOW MUCH DID THAT AFFECT HOW YOU
WERE ABLE TO DEAL WITH HER?
HOW DID THAT AFFECT HER?
THE CRITICISM SHE WAS CINGFA AT
HOME?
>> SHE DIDN'T SEEM TO BE
BOTHERED BY IT.
AND OF COURSE THE ULTIMATE TEST
IS SHE GOT RE-ELECTED.
SO IF YOU WIN, MAYBE PEOPLE ARE
CRITICIZING YOU BUT YOU HAVE THE
MAJORITY WITH YOU.
AND I AGREE WITH JIM
WHOLEHEARTEDLY THAT SHE CHANGED
THE ARC... SHE WITH RONALD
REAGAN TOGETHER CHANGED THE ARC
OF HISTORY.
AND I WOULD PUT IT IN ONE WORD:
FREEDOM.
THAT WAS HER TAG LINE.
FREEDOM AT HOME FOR MARKETS TO
FREEDOM.
WORK.
FREEDOM AT HOME FOR MARKETS TO
FREEDOM ABROAD FOR COUNTRIES TO
WORK.
FIND THEIR WAY AND TO HAVE
FREEDOM ABROAD FOR COUNTRIES TO
RESPECTABLE, RESPONSIBLE,
FIND THEIR WAY AND TO HAVE
ELECTED GOVERNMENTS.
RESPECTABLE, RESPONSIBLE,
>> Woodruff: WE ARE SO PLEASED
ELECTED GOVERNMENTS.
TO HAVE BOTH OF YOU JOIN US THIS
>> Woodruff: WE ARE SO PLEASED
EVENING.
TO HAVE BOTH OF YOU JOIN US THIS
FORMER SECRETARIES OF STATE
EVENING.
GEORGE SHULTZ AND JIM BAKER.
FORMER SECRETARIES OF STATE
THANK YOU.
GEORGE SHULTZ AND JIM BAKER.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
THANK YOU.
AS WELL AS TREASURY SECRETARY
>> Woodruff: AS WE'VE SAID,
THATCHER WAS THE FIRST WOMAN TO
HEAD A MAJOR WESTERN POWER.
ONE WOMAN WHO WATCHED HER
CLOSELY, AND LATER BECAME
CANADA'S FIRST AND ONLY FEMALE
PRIME MINISTER, IS KIM CAMPBELL.
SHE TOOK OFFICE TWO AND HALF
YEARS AFTER THATCHER RESIGNED.
WELCOME TO
THE PROGRAM.
PRIME MINISTER CAMPBELL, WE
HEARD SECRETARY GEORGE SHULTZ
SAY THAT THE FACT THAT MARGARET
THATCHER WAS A WOMAN DIDN'T
REALLY HAVE A GREAT DEAL, IF
ANYTHING, TO DO WITH HOW SHE WAS
SEEN BY HIM AND BY OTHERS WHO
DEALT WITH HER.
HOW DID YOU SEE HER?
AS SEONEOM WHO CAME ALONG IN
POLITICS SHORTLY THEREAFTER?
>> WELL, IT'S INTERESTING.
THE SUMMER OF '93 WHEN I WAS
TRAVELING CANADA AS A NEW LEAP
MINTED PRIME MINISTER, LITTLE
OLD MEN WOULD SAY TO ME YOU'RE
GOING TO BE OUR MARGARET
THATCHER.
IT WAS CLEAR THAT SHE HAD
CREATED A CONSTITUENCY FOR
FEMALE LEADERS IN VERY
INTERESTING PLACES.
I THINK THAT EVERY WOMAN WHO
WANTS TO LEAD, EVERY WOMAN WHO
IS LEADING TODAY OWES HER A DEBT
BECAUSE SHE JUST DROP-KICKED ALL
OF THE STEREOTYPES ABOUT WOMEN
AS LEADERS.
YOU KNOW, OUT OF THE BALLPARK.
SHE WAS TOUGH.
SHE WAS ABLE TO SEE THINGS
THROUGH.
SHE WAS ALSO REMARKABLY
FEMININE.
VERY LOVELY LOOKING WOMAN.
WATCHING THE OLD CLIPS OF HER
IT'S KIND OF TOUCHING TO BE
REMINDED OF WHAT A LOVELY WOMAN
SHE WAS.
SHE ALSO WAS A MODERN
POLITICIAN.
SHE TOOK STEPS TO LOWER HER
VOICE.
AND WHEN SOMEONE OFFER TO REMAKE
HER IMAGE SHE DID.
SHE WAS ACCUSED OF BEING TOO
MUCH OF A CLOTHES HORSE.
SHE ALLOWED HERSELF TO BECOME
DOWDY.
WHEN SHE BECAME PRIME MINISTER
SHE ALWAYS LOOKED GREAT.
BUT SHE REALLY JUST I THINK
OPENED UP A SPACE FOR WOMEN IN
OTHER COUNTRIES TO BE CREDIBLE
AS LEADERS.
THERE WERE THINGS YOU DIDN'T
HAVE TO COMPROMISE ANYMORE.
THIS NOTION THAT YOU COULD NOT
BE TOUGH AND STILL BE FEMININE,
THAT THEY WOULD BE SOME WAY THAT
YOU WEREN'T REALLY A WOMAN IF
YOU WANTED TO LEAD A COUNTRY OR
IF YOU WERE PREPARED TO SEND
PEOPLE INTO BATTLE.
IT JUST WASN'T THE CASE.
SHE JUST ESTABLISHED THAT ONCE
AND FOR ALL.
>> Woodruff: THE ADVERTISING
PUBLIC RELATIONS FIRM SHE
CONSULTED WHEN SHE WAS RUNNING
FOR PRIME MINISTER.
ARE YOU SAYING THOUGH THAT WOMEN
IN POLITICS AROUND THE WORLD
LOOK TO MARGARET THATCHER?
>> WELL, WHETHER THEY LOOK TO
HER THEMSELVES OR NOT -- AND
SHE'S CONTROVERSIAL AND PEOPLE
HAVE DIFFERENT VIEWS.
I WAS A GRADUATE STUDENT IN
LONDON IN THE EARLY '70s WHEN
THE POWER USED TO GO OFF FOR SIX
HOURS A DAY BECAUSE OF THE
MINERS' STRIKE.
ACTUALLY HOW SHE DEALT WITH THAT
WAS BRILLIANT.
SHE DIDN'T TAKE THE MINE.
SHE WAITED TO BUILD UP STOCKS OF
COAL SO SHE COULD TAKE THE MINE
AND NOT HAVE THE DISRUPTIONS IN
POWER.
IT WAS OUTRAGEOUS.
SOME PEOPLE DON'T LIKE THAT
TOUGHNESS.
SOME PEOPLE MAY BE MORE LEFT
WING THAN SHE OR HAVE DIFFERENT
POLICY CHOICES.
BUT I THINK THE CREDIBILITY OF A
WOMAN LEADING, PARTICULARLY WHEN
YOU MAKE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS ON SECURITY ISSUES,
MARGARET THATCHER PREPARED THAT
WAY.
SO I THINK WE ALL OWE HER A
DEBT.
WHETHER WE WOULD HAVE DONE AS
SHE DID OR NOT.
YOU KNOW, SHE HAD NO ROLE
MODELS.
WHO DID MARGARET THATCHER HAVE
TO MODEL HERSELF UPON?
THERE WASN'T ANYBODY.
SHE KIND OF MADE HER OWN WAY.
A LOT OF THE CRITICISM OF HER IN
BRITAIN WAS ALSO CLASS
CRITICISM.
SHE HAD AN UPPER CLASS EDUCATION
BUT SHE WAS A LOWER-MIDDLE CLASS
GIRL.
SHE LED A PARTY THAT HAD A LOT
OF PEOPLE FROM PRIVILEGE.
IN FACT THE CURRENT CONSERVATIVE
PLIEM MINISTER IS OFTEN ACCUSED
MUCH BEING TOO UPPER CLASS AND
HAS TO BE KIND OF A REGULAR GUY
TO DISPEL THAT.
SHE BROKE THROUGH SO MANY SOCIAL
BARRIERS IN BRITAIN NOT JUST THE
GENDER ONE.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT DO YOU SEE
ULTIMATELY AS HER LEGACY?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT SHE CHANGED THE
POWER STRUCTURE IN BRITAIN.
YOU KNOW, IT AMUSES ME IN THE
UNITED STATES WHEN PEOPLE TALK
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, PRESIDENT OBAMA
IS A SOCIALIST AND I WANT TO BUY
THEM ADDICTIONARY.
YOU DON'T HAVE ANY SOCIALISTS IN
THIS COUNTRY BUT THE CLASS WAR
IN BRITAIN AND THE POWER OF
UNACCOUNTABLE PEOPLE, YOU KNOW,
THE LEADER OF THE MINERS UNION
WAS BENT ON DESTROYING THE
GOVERNMENT.
SHE KIND OF SHIFTED THAT.
SO THAT THE LABOR PARTY IS A
VERY DIFFERENT PARTY NOW FROM
WHAT IT WAS THEN.
SHE REALLY HELPED TO REMAKE THE
POLITICAL CONFIGURATION IN
BRITAIN TO MAKE IT A MUCH MORE,
I THINK, CENTRIST CONSTRUCTIVE
BUT WITH IDEOLOGICAL CHOICE.
I THINK THAT AS THE DECADES GO
ON AND PEOPLE LOOK BACK, THEY
WILL SEE THAT IT WAS A SALUTARY
REJIGGING OF THE POLITICAL
DEBATE IN GREAT BRITAIN BUT ALSO
SHE WAS A GREAT... SHE HAVE
DIDN'T GET ANYTHING SHE DIDN'T
WORK FOR.
SHE DIDN'T GET HER POSITION BY
PRIVILEGE OR FAMILY CONNECTIONS.
SHE OPENED UP THE MERITOCRACY.
SHE HAD JEWS IN HER CABINET.
SHE BROUGHT AROUND HER PEOPLE
WHO WERE SUCCESSFUL, SELF-MADE
PEOPLE.
SHE MADE IT ACCEPTABLE TO BE
SUCCESSFUL IN BRITAIN WHICH WAS
VERY DIFFICULT IN THAT KIND OF
CLASP RIDDEN SOCIETY THAT LOOKED
DOWN ON PEOPLE IN TRADE AND ET
CETERA.
SO I THINK HER EFFECT ON BRITISH
SOCIETY IS STILL BEING FELT.
I THINK IT WAS A HEALTHY ONE.
>> Woodruff: STILL BEING FELT
AND STILL BEING DISCUSSED.
FORMER PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA,
KIM CAMPBELL, THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, SEE THE
WORLD'S REACTION TO THE PASSISIG
OF THE BRITISH LEADER.
AND YOU CAN WATCH HER 1981
CONVERSATION WITH THE NEWSHOUR
>> Ifill: IN THE WAKE OF A RUSH
TO ACTION IN STATE CAPITOLS
AROUND THE COUNTRY, THE GUN
DEBATE COULD REACH CRITICAL MASS
IN WASHINGTON THIS WEEK.
BUT IT'S STILL UNCLEAR HOW IT
WILL SORT ITSELF OUT.
STEPPING UP HIS PUSH FOR NEW
FEDERAL GUN LEGISLATION,
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOOK HIS
ARGUMENT TODAY TO HARTFORD
CONNECTICUT, NOT FAR FROM THE
SITE OF DECEMBER'S NEWTOWN
SHOOTINGS WHERE 26 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED.
>> NEWTOWN, WE WANT YOU TO KNOW
THAT WE'RE HERE WITH YOU.
WE WILL NOT WALK AWAY FROM THE
PROMISES WE'VE MADE.
WE ARE AS DETERMINED AS EVER TO
DO WHAT MUST BE DONE.
IN FACT, I'M HERE TO ASK YOU TO
HELP ME SHOW THAT WE CAN GET IT
DONE.
>> Ifill: CONGRESS RETURNED TO
WASHINGTON TODAY FACING
CONTENTIOUS DEBATE ON MEASURES
THAT WOULD INCLUDE TOUGHER
PENALTIES FOR GUN TRAFFICKING
AND MORE MONEY FOR SCHOOL
SAFETY.
ALREADY OFF THE TABLE, A BAN ON
ASSAULT WEAPONS AND
HIGH-CAPACITY AMMUNITION CLIPS.
INSTEAD, MUCH OF THE
BEHIND-THE-SCENES NEGOTIATION
HAS FOCUSED ON WHETHER GUN
BUYERS SHOULD BE SUBJECT TO
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
AND WHETHER THOSE SALES MUST BE
RECORDED.
BUT EVERYONE IS NOT ON BOARD, AT
LEAST 13 REPUBLICAN LAWMAKERS
LED BY SENATOR RAND PAUL ARE
THREATENING TO STOP ANY NEW LAW
THAT WOULD DIMINISH CITIZENS'
RIGHT TO
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID COMPLAINED ABOUT THE
FILIBUSTER THREAT TODAY.
>> MANY SENATE REPUBLICANS SEEM
AFRAID TO EVEN ENGAGE IN THIS
DEBATE.
SHAME ON THEM, MADAM PRESIDENT.
THE LEAST REPUBLICANS OWE THE
PARENTS OF THESE 20 LITTLE
BABIES WHO WERE MURDERED AT
SANDY HOOK IS A THOUGHTFUL
DEBATE ABOUT WHETHER STRONGER
LAWS COULD HAVE SAVED THEIR
LITTLE GIRLS AND BOYS.
THE LEAST REPUBLICANS OWE THEM
IS A VOTE.
>> Ifill: BEHIND THE SCENES
PENNSYLVANIA REPUBLICAN PAT TOO
MANIY AND WEST VIRGINIA DEMOCRAT
JOE MANCHIN ARE WORKING TO FORGE
A BIPARTISAN DEAL ON BACKGROUND
CHECKS BUT THAT DEAL HAS PROVEN
ELUSIVE.
YESTERDAY FORMER CONGRESSMAN ASA
HUTCHINSON WHO AUTHORED A SCHOOL
SAFETY PROPOSAL FOR THE N.R.A.
REPEATED A POINT OTHER LAWMAKERS
HAVE MADE.
>> EVEN IF YOU HAD ALL YOUR
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECKS, BAD
GUYS ARE GOING TO GET GUNS.
IT'S NOT GOING TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM IN THE SCHOOLS.
IT'S NOT GOING TO DIMINISH THE
NEED FOR GREATER SECURITY IN THE
SCHOOLS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT'S TRIP
TO CONNECTICUT COMES FOUR DAYS
AFTER THE STATE ENACTED SOME OF
THE STRICTEST NEW GUN-CONTROL
MEASURES IN THE COUNTRY.
COLORADO, NEW YORK AND MARYLAND,
HAVE ALSO RECENTLY PASSED TOUGH
NEW RESTRICTIONS ON GUN
OWNERSHIP.
BUT OTHER STATES, INCLUDING
MISSISSIPPI, ARKANSAS, AND
TENNESSEE, HAVE ENACTED OR ARE
CONSIDERING BILLS AIMED AT
LOOSENING RULES ON GUN
POSSESSION.
THE ARGUMENT HAS SPILLED OVER ON
TO THE AIR WAVES.
IN CONNECTICUT, ONE AD FEATURED
PARENTS WHO LOST CHILDREN AT
NEWTOWN'S SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL.
>> DON'T LET THE MEMORY OF
NEWTOWN FADE WITHOUT DOING
SOMETHING REAL.
>> Ifill: 11 OF THOSE RELATIVES
WILL BRING THEIR PUSH FOR GUN
CONTROL TO CAPITOL HILL
TOMORROW.
THEY'LL TRAVEL TO WASHINGTON
WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA ABOARD AIR
FORCE ONE TONIGHT.
FOR MORE ON WHAT IS HAPPENING ON
CAPITOL HILL AND IN STATE
CAPITOLS AS WELL, WE TURN TO ED
O'KEEFE, WHO HAS BEEN FOLLOWING
THE GUN CONTROL DEBATE FOR THE
"WASHINGTON POST."
ARKANSAS STATE REPRESENTATIVE
CHARLES COLLINS, WHO SPONSORED
LEGISLATION IN LITTLE ROCK THAT
ALLOWS GUN OWNERS TO CARRY THEIR
WEAPONS TO CHURCH.
AND VINNY DEMARCO, PRESIDENT OF
MARYLANDERS TO PREVENT GUN
VIOLENCE, WHO HELPED WIN PASSAGE
OF THAT STATE'S SWEEPING NEW GUN
CONTROL LAW.
ED O'KEEFE, WHAT IS THE STATUS
ON THE PROSPECT OF COMPROMISE ON
FEDERAL GUN LEGISLATION AS
THINGS STAND TONIGHT?
>> AS YOU MENTIONED SENATORS JOE
MANCHIN OF WEST VIRGINIA AND PAT
TOO MANIY OF PENNLVANSYIA ARE
TALKING.
THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF SOME KIND OF A
COMPROMISE THAT WOULD
ESSENTIALLY EXEMPT, LET'S SAY,
FAMILY MEMBERS FROM EXCHANGING
WEAPONS OR PERHAPS SELLING THEM
TO EACH OTHER.
AND ALSO MAYBE MAKE SOME LIMITED
EXCEPTIONS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
HUNTING TOGETHER, LET'S SAY,
SOMEBODY'S WEAPON BREAKS DOWN
AND THEY NEED TO BORROW ONE FROM
SOMEBODY ELSE.
BEYOND THAT, THERE WOULD
ESSENTIALLY BE REQUIREMENTS THAT
ALL OTHER GUN PURCHASES UNDERGO
A BACKGROUND CHECK AND THE BIG
STICKING POINT AT THIS POINT
REMAINS ALSO WHETHER OR NOT
RECORDS WOULD BE KEPT OF ALL
SALES.
DEMOCRATS WANT THAT TO HAPPEN TO
HELP LAW ENFORCE ALSO IN THE
EVENT THAT A WEAPON IS USED IN A
CRIME.
REPUBLICANS SAY THAT'S THE START
OF A NATIONAL GUN REGISTRY OR
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO IT AND IT
WOULD INFRINGE ON SECOND
AMENDMENT RIGHTS.
THE UNDERLYING BILL OF ALL THIS
WAS ESSENTIALLY UNVEILED TODAY
BY HARRY REID UP ON CAPITOL HILL
WHO, AS YOU NOTED, COMPLAINED
QUITE STRONGLY ABOUT THE
REPUBLICAN OBJECTIONS.
WE'VE LEARNED TONIGHT THAT HIS
COUNTERPARTS, SENATE MINORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL, WOULD
ALSO JOIN THAT FILIBUSTER IF THE
CURRENT DEMOCRATIC BILL WERE
BROUGHT THE FLOOR.
THAT'S AN IMPORTANT DISTINCTION.
HIS AIDES AREN'T SAYING WHETHER
OR NOT HE WOULD OPPOSE ANY NEW
BIPARTISAN LANGUAGE THAT COMES
FORTH BUT IF THE CURRENT
DEMOCRATIC BILL IS BROUGHT
FORTH, HE WOULD STAND IN ITS WAY
AND JOIN THAT BIG FILIBUSTER.
>> Ifill: LET'S TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK AT WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH
THESE ARGUMENTS OUTSIDE OF THE
NATION'S CAPITAL.
LET'S GO TO ARKANSAS WITH
REPRESENTATIVE CHARLES COLLINS.
TELL ME ABOUT WHAT IN YOUR BILL
WOULD PROTECT THE RIGHT EITHER
OF GUN OWNERS OR OF CITIZENS.
>> THANK YOU.
FIRST OF ALL IT'S GREAT TO BE
HERE.
IN ARC ARC WE'VE PASSED A COUPLE
MAJOR BILLS.
THE LEGISLATION I SPONSORED HAS
TO DO WITH ALLOWING PROFESSORS
AND OTHER STAFF MEMBERS AT
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES TO
HAVE A CONCEALED CARRY PERMIT TO
CARRY ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS
WHERE THEY WORK.
THERE HAS BEEN ANOTHER BILL, AS
YOU MENTIONED, PASSED IN
ARKANSAS WHICH WOULD ALLOW
CHURCHES TO IDENTIFY
INDIVIDUALS, OBVIOUSLY THEY HAVE
TO HAVE A CONCEAL CARRY A
LICENSE, WOULD COULD CARRY IN
THE CHURCH.
THE KEY THING ABOUT THE COLLEGE
CAMPUS LEGISLATION, GWEN, IS THE
REALITY IN AMERICA IS WE'VE GOT
A PROBLEM AND THAT IS LOVED ONES
BEING KILLED IN PLACES LIKE
COLLEGE CAMPUSES AND SCHOOL
YARDS.
AND I BELIEVE ONE OF THE REASONS
IS BECAUSE CRAZY KILLERS KNOW
THOSE ARE GUN-FREE ZONES AND
THERE'S A CONCENTRATION OF
INNOCENT FOLK.
>> Ifill: HAS THAT HAPPENED IN
ARKANSAS?
ARE THERE EXAMPLES WHERE THIS
HAS ACTUALLY HAPPENED?
>> YES.
WE HAD AN INCIDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF FAYETTEVILLE ABOUT
TEN YEARS AGO.
WE HAD AN INCIDENT AT U.C.A. TWO
OR THREE YEARS AGO.
THOSE ARE BOTH COLLEGE
INCIDENTS.
IN JONESBORO MANY YEARS AGO WE
HAD AN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL WITH
MANY PEOPLE KILLED.
>> Ifill: LET ME TALK TO
MR. DEMARCO.
NATIONALLY THIS ASSAULT WEAPONS
BAN SEEMS TO BE A DEAD LETTER
BUT NOT IN MARYLAND.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE.
>> UNDER THE LEADER OF THE
GOVERNOR, WE DID BAN ASSAULT
WEAPONS AND HIGH CAPACITY GUN
MAGAZINES WHICH HAVE NO PLACE IN
OUR SOCIETY.
MORE IMPORTANTLY, GWEN, WE
PASSED A LANDMARK LAW REQUIRING
THE HANDGUN PURCHASERS GET A
FINGERPRINT-BASED BACKGROUND
CHECK AND A LICENSE FROM THE
POLICE BEFORE GETTING A HANDGUN.
EXPERTS FROM THE JOHNS HOPKINS
CENTER FOR GUN POLICY AND
RESEARCH LET THE LEGISLATURE
KNOW THAT STATES THAT HAVE THOSE
LAWS HAVE LOWER GUN DEATHS
BECAUSE THOSE LAWS DETER PEOPLE
FROM BUYING GUNS FOR CRIMINALS.
WHAT HAPPENS IN WHAT IS CALLED A
STRAW PURCHASES, SOMEONE WITH A
CLEAN BACKGROUND WITHOUT A
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND GOES INTO A
GUN STORE AND BUYS A GUN FOR A
CRIMINAL.
THAT'S A MAJOR WAY GUNS GET INTO
THE HANDS OF CRIMINALS.
STATES THAT HAVE THESE LAWS
DON'T HAVE THE STRAW PURCHASERS
AND HAVE FEWER GUN DEATHS.
WE'RE GOING TO SAVE LIVES IN
MARYLAND WITH OUR NEW LAW.
>> Ifill: SHOULD THIS BE
HAPPENING ONLY ON THE STATE
LEVEL, THIS ARGUMENT?
>> WELL, I THINK THE ARGUMENT
CAN HAPPEN IN BOTH PLACES.
FRANKLY I'M NOT IN FAVOR OF
RESTRICTIONS ON OUR GUN RIGHTS.
CERTAINLY NOT COMING FROM
WASHINGTON D.C.
AND FRANKLY IN ARKANSAS I THINK
MOST OF US BELIEVE THERE ARE
PLENTY OF LAWS.
WE JUST NEED TO MAKE SURE WE
ENFORCE THEM.
AS I SAID, GWEN, I THINK HELPING
TO SOLVE THIS PROBLEM WE'RE
MAKING PROGRESS AGAINST THIS
PROBLEM IS DOING THINGS THAT
DETER CRAZY KILLERS FROM GOING
TO PLACES WHERE WE'VE GOT A LOT
OF INNOCENTS WHO CAN'T DEFEND
THEMSELVES.
>> Ifill: YOU USED THE TERM
CRAZY KILLERS TWICE NOW.
YOU AND OTHERS LIKE YOU HAVE
SAID THAT MENTAL ILLNESS IS
SOMETHING THAT NEEDS TO BE
ADDRESSED AS PART OF THE
SOLUTION HERE.
AS PART OF THIS PACKAGE OF GUN
LEFNLG LAYINGS IN ARKANSAS, WAS
THERE ANYTHING THAT SPOKE TO
THAT ISSUE?
>> YES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE'RE
WORKING IN PASSING THROUGH THE
ARKANSAS LEGISLATURE IS BETTER
CROSS-SHARING OF DATA SO THAT IF
SOMEBODY HAS A MENTAL ISSUE
ADJUDICATED IN A COURT THAT WHEN
THE BACKGROUND CHECKS THAT ARE
RUN HAPPEN, THAT INFORMATION
WILL BE PART OF THE CHECK SO WE
CAN AVOID THAT PERSON BEING
APPROVED FOR A GUN.
>> Ifill: VINNY DEMARCO, CAN
MARYLAND BE A NATIONAL MODEL?
>> MARYLAND IS A NATIONAL MODEL.
THE LAW THAT WE PASSED IN
MARYLAND DID INCLUDE TIGHTER
PROVISIONS ON MAKING SURE PEOPLE
WITH MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES DON'T
GET GUNS.
THAT'S VERY IMPORTANT.
BUT THE KEY REASON THERE ARE
DAY-TO-DAY SHOOTINGS IN MARYLAND
AND ACROSS THE COUNTRY IS
BECAUSE OF GUNS GETTING FROM A
GUN STORE TO A CRIMINAL THROUGH
A STRAW PURCHASER OR ANOTHER
WAY.
AND THE BEST TOOL A STATE CAN
USE IS A FINGERPRINT-BASED
LICENSING.
THE FIVE STATES THAT HAVE THAT
ALREADY HAVE LOWER GUN DEATH
RATES.
IN ONE STATE, MISSOURI, THEY
REPEALED A FINGERPRINT-BASED
LICENSING LAW AND THEIR GUN
DEATHS WENT UP WHILE DEATHS WERE
GOING DOWN ELSEWHERE.
>> Ifill: DID THIS DEBATE CHANGE
IN MARYLAND BECAUSE OF WHAT
HAPPENED IN NEWTOWN AT ALL?
>> NEWTOWN CHANGED THE WHOLE
COUNTRY.
NEWTOWN CHANGED THE DEBATE
EVERYWHERE AND GAVE MOMENTUM TO
PASS LAWS THAT ARE GOING TO SAVE
LIVES.
>> Ifill: IN ARKANSAS?
OBVIOUSLY THE TRAGEDY AT
NEWTOWN OUR HEARTS CONTINUE TO
GO OUT FOR ALL THOSE PARENTS.
BUT AS YOU KNOW, SEVERAL YEARS
AGO, WE HAD A TRAGEDY IN BLACKS
BURG.
THERE WERE DOZENS OF PEOPLE
KILLED THERE.
THIS IS A PROBLEM THAT CONTINUES
TO CROP UP PERIODICALLY.
WE GET THESE ATROCIOUS
SITUATIONS.
AND STOPPING THEM IS CERTAINLY
SOMETHING THAT WE WANT TO DO
HERE.
>> Ifill: ED O'KEEFE, AS YOU
LOOK AT ALL OF THESE LEGISLATION
EFFORTS GOING ON AT THE STATE
LEVEL, ARE THERE MORE THAT ARE
LOOSENING GUN RESTRICTIONS OR
EXPANDING OR EXPANDING GUN
RESTRICTIONS?
>> WELL, IN TOTAL ROUGHLY SINCE
NEWTOWN THERE'S A GROUP OUT IN
SAN FRANCISCO THAT'S BEEN
TALLYING THIS UP.
WE LIVE IN A BIG COUNTRY.
50 STATES.
STATE LEGISLATORS HAVE
INTRODUCED 1300 DIFFERENT
PROPOSALS TO EITHER STRENGTHEN
OR WEAKEN THE GUN LAWS.
AT THIS POINT IT LOOKS AS IF
THERE HAVE BEEN MORE TO
STRENGTHEN GUN LAWS BUT IN MANY
STATES THOSE PROPOSALS HAVE BEEN
REJECTED.
YOU TALK ABOUT ARKANSAS.
THAT'S A GREAT EXAMPLE OF A
STATE THAT LOOSENED THE
RESTRICTIONS A BIT.
SOMEWHERE LIKE SOUTH A DAKOTA
THEY PASSED WHAT THEY CALL A
SCHOOL SENTINEL PROGRAM THAT
ALLOWED QUALIFIED SCHOOL
EMPLOYEES TO CARRY A WEAPON WITH
THEM ON A SCHOOL PROPERTY.
THEN FLIP SIDE OF COURSE IS
MARYLAND, CONNECTICUT, NEW YORK
AND POTENTIALLY AT SOME POINT
SOON CALIFORNIA.
ALL OF THEM -- AND COULD COULD
WE SHOULD INCLUDE -- ALL OF THEM
HAVE PROPOSED RESTRICTIONS ON
THE SIZE OF AMMUNITION CLIPS.
CALIFORNIA MAY GO SO FAR AS TO
BAN ANY SEMIAUTOMATIC RIFLE THAT
CAN TAKE A DETACHABLE PART.
ANY.
SO A COMPLETE BAN ON ASSAULT
WEAPONS.
AND THAT ISSUE OUT THERE IS
POTENTIALLY COMPLICATING THE
FEDERAL DEBATE FOR A LOT OF
CALIFORNIA LAWMAKERS WHO WANT TO
BE ABLE TO VOTE ON SOMETHING
LIKE THAT HERE INGTON.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT IS IN
CONNECTICUT NOT FAR FROM
NEWTOWN.
THESE MEMBERS OF THESE NEWTOWN
FAMILIES WILL BE ON AIR FORCE
WON COMING TO WASHINGTON TO
LOBBY HERE.
WE HEARD SENATE MAJORITY LEADER
REED SAY 90% OF PEOPLE ARE FAVOR
IN BACKGROUND CHECKS.
WE HEARD THAT FROM THE PODIUM IN
THE WHITE HOUSE.
THE PRESIDENT IS GETTING PUBLIC
OPINION ON HIS SIDE.
WHAT IS THE PUBLIC OPINION HERE?
>> IN GENERAL THEY WOULD LIKE TO
SEE SOMETHING DONE.
"WASHINGTON POST," PEW AND
OTHERS HAVE DONE POLLING THAT
SUGGESTS THAT NINE IN TEN
AMERICANS SUPPORT AN EXPANDED
BACKGROUND CHECK PROGRAM.
THERE IS SUPPORT FOR GUN
TRAFFICKING.
MAKING THAT A FEDERAL CRIME FOR
THE FIRST TIME.
CERTAINLY IN LINE TO SOME EXTENT
WITH WHAT THE N.R.A. IS
PROPOSING, THERE IS SUPPORT TO
BOLSTER SCHOOL SECURITY
PROGRAMS.
EITHER BY PROVIDING MONEY OR
JUST SIMPLY HAVING STATES AND
CITIES VOTE ON MAKING SECURITY
AT THOSE AREAS MORE... MAKING IT
STRONGER.
WHAT I THINK REMAINS TO BE SEEN
THOUGH IS WHETHER OR NOT THE
SENATE REALLY TAKES THAT INTO
ACCOUNT.
WE HAVE TO GUESS FROM OUR
ARKANSAS.
MARK PRYER, THE DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR FROM ARKANSAS IS THE
GREAT EXAMPLE OF A KIND OF GUY
WHO IS STUCK AT THE MOMENT.
HIS PARTY WANTS TO MAKE CHANGES
BUT HE FACES A RE-ELECTION NEXT
YEAR.
HE'S ONE OF SEVERAL CONSERVATIVE
DEMOCRATS WHO FACE A REAL
CHALLENGE IN TRYING TO FIND A
WAY TO EITHER SUPPORT THIS OR
REJECT IT AND EXPLAIN WHY THEY
DID THAT.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE WATCHING AND
REPORTING ON THAT.
ED O'KEEFE OF THE "WASHINGTON
POST," CHARLES COLLINS, THE
REPUBLICAN OF ARKANSAS, AND
VINNY DEMARCO OF MARYLANDERS TO
PREVENT GUN VIOLENCE, THANK YOU
ALL VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN WATCH
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S NEWTOWN SPEECH
IN FULL ON OUR YOUTUBE PAGE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, WE
RETURN TO THE LEGACY OF THE COLD
WAR AND A BATTLE TO PRESERVE ONE
OF ITS ICONS, THE BERLIN WALL.
OUR STORY COMES FROM INDEPENDENT
PRODUCERS CARL NASMAN AND ANNE-
SOPHIE BRANDLIN, AND IS REPORTD
BY NASMAN.
Reporter: THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
AT THE BERLIN WALL IN GERMANY.
BUT THIS TIME INSTEAD OF TEARING
DOWN THE WALL, THE CITIZENS OF
BERLIN ARE HERE TO PROTECT WHAT
REMAINS OF IT.
> IT> WAS HERE FOR 28 YEARS.
EVERYBODY HATED IT.
NOWADAYS PEOPLE LOVE IT.
>> I WOULD SAY WHEN THE WALL
CAME DOWN, THEY WANT TO TEAR
THIS DOWN?
I'M SHOCKED.
>> Reporter: THERE ISN'T MUCH
WALL LEFT.
IN JUST OVER TWO DECADES NEARLY
80% WAS SHREDDED AND PAVED INTO
ROADWAYS.
OTHER BITS WERE SOLD AS GIFTS OR
SOUVENIRS.
NOW THERE ARE ONLY A FEW
PHYSICAL REMINDERS.
OF WHERE THE CITY WAS SPLIT IN
TWO.
THIS IS THE EAST SIDE GALLERY.
A MILE-LONG STRETCH OF POLITICAL
MURALS PAINTED JUST AFTER THE
FALL OF THE WALL.
AND IT'S THE LONGEST PIECE OF
THE BERLIN WALL STILL STANDING.
NOW DEVELOPERS WANT TO BUILD A
14-STORY APARTMENT BUILDING
RIGHT HERE.
THE PLANS INCLUDE REMOVING
SEVERAL SECTIONS OF THE WALL.
THE BATTLE BETWEEN DEVELOPERS
AND PRESERVATIONISTS CAME TO A
HEAD IN MARCH WHEN CONSTRUCTION
CRANES OPENED UP TWO GAPS IN THE
WALL.
>> PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE HERE IN A
HOUSE.
IT'S THE SAME LIKE WHEN YOU LIVE
IN AUSCHWITZ.
>> Reporter: THE NEW APARTMENTS
WOULD BE BUILT IN WHAT WAS KNOWN
AS NO MAN'S LAND.
THE EMPTY SPACE BETWEEN THE WALL
AND THE RIVER.
NEARLY 100 PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN
AREAS LIKE THIS ONE.
WHILE FLEEING FROM EAST TO WEST.
SOME OF THEM HERE.
>> BEHIND THE WALL TEN PERSONS
HAVE BEEN KILLED WHO WANT TO
LIVE ON THE CEMETERY.
>> Reporter: THIS PERSON MOVED
FROM FRANCE TO WEST BERLIN IN
THE EARLY 1980s.
HE WAS ONE OF THE FIRST ARTISTS
TO START PAINTING THE WALL.
>> I USED TO LIVE SO CLOSE TO
THE WALL.
I LOOKED EVERY DAY AT THE WALL.
IT WAS VERY DEPRESSING.
IT CAN PUT COLORS ON THE WALL.
IT WILL NEVER BE BEAUTIFUL
BECAUSE IT IS A DEATH MACHINE.
>> Reporter: THE PROPOSED
APARTMENTS WOULD BE BUILT JUST
BEHIND HIS PAINTINGS.
>> I CAN'T UNDERSTAND HOW CAN
YOU DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
IT'S LOUD.
IT'S DIRTY.
THIS IS A WALL.
I MEAN IT'S NOT A TOURIST
ATTRACTION.
IT'S A MEMORIAL.
>> Reporter: THE CONSTRUCTION IS
PART OF A LARGER PLAN TO DEVELOP
THE RIVER FRONT WHERE CLUBS,
BARS, AND OLD WAREHOUSES OCCUPY
POTENTIALLY HIGH RENT SPACE.
DR. RICHARD MANGS, A SPOKE
PERSON FOR THE BERLIN SENATE
SAYS THE CITY NEEDS INVESTMENT.
>> THE CITY HAS A LOT OF
UNEMPLOYMENT.
IT'S BECAUSE THERE'S NO INDUSTRY
HERE ANYMORE.
BERLIN HAS FORMER GUEST STRIPS
EVERYWHERE.
OF COURSE NEW THINGS ARE BEING
BUILT THERE AS WELL.
ME PERSONALLY, I WOULD NOT BUILD
HOUSES AT THIS SPOT.
I WOULDN'T LET IT HAPPEN EITHER.
BUT OUR PREDECESSORS ALLOWED
THIS TO HAPPEN TEN YEARS AGO.
NOW THIS IS THE CONSEQUENCE.
>> Reporter: ATTITUDES TOWARD
THE WALL HAVE SHIFTED IN THE
LAST TWO DECADES.
NOW MANY GERMANS WANT TO
PRESERVE IT.
SO THE MISTAKES OF THE PAST
WON'T BE REPEATED.
>> IF YOU JUST WIPE IT AWAY, IT
NEVER HAPPENED.
IT HAPPENED.
IT CAN HAPPEN.
POLITICAL SYSTEMS CAN CHANGE AND
DO THIS TO PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: THIS MAN AND
ANOTHER ARE BERLIN CLUB OWNERS
AND ORGANIZERRERS OF THE WALL
PROTEST.
THEY WORRY THAT BERLIN'S HISTORY
IS NOW DISAPPEARING IN A RUSH OF
DEVELOPMENT.
>> OTHER GENERATIONS WILL NOT
GET THE CHANCE TO HAVE A REALLY
FEEL OF HOW IT WAS IN THE
G.D.R., LEAVING IN EAST BERLIN
NOT BEING ABLE TO TRAVEL, NOT
BEING ABLE TO GET ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE WALL.
IN THE '90s BERLIN AUTHORITIES
THOUGHT WE DON'T NEED THIS WALL
ANYMORE.
CHECK POINT CHARLIE NOW LOOKS
LIKE DISNEYLAND.
IT'S NOT ORIGINAL.
THERE'S NOTHING ORIGINAL THERE
ANYMORE AT CHECK POINT CHARLIE
WHICH IS REALLY A PITY BECAUSE
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE COME THERE
EVERY DAY AND WANT TO SEE HOW
THIS WAS IN THE MIDDLE OF A
CITY, A BORDER.
BUT YOU CAN'T SEE IT ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, A FEW
REMAINING PARTS OF THE WALL ARE
STILL PRESERVED IN SOME UNLIKELY
PLACES.
HANS MARTIN FLEISCHER WITNESSED
THE FALL OF THE G.D.R.
IT WAS THE HAPPIEST DAY OF HIS
LIFE.
HE PURCHASED THE FIRST FOUR
PIECES EVER REMOVED FROM THE
WALL.
AND NOW HE KEEPS THEM IN HIS
WAREHOUSE TWO HOURS NORTH OF
BERLIN.
>> AT THE VERY BEGINNING I HAD A
VERY COMMERCIAL IDEA.
I SIMPLY WANTED TO BUY THESE
PIECES AND SELL THEM AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
OVER THE YEARS I THOUGHT, OKAY,
THERE'S A LOT OF HISTORY THERE.
I STILL LOVE THE STORY BECAUSE
THIS IS THE MOST BEAUTIFUL THING
THAT GERMANY HAS EVER CREATED.
TO ME TOUCHING THIS, I KNOW,
OKAY, IT'S REAL.
>> Reporter: HE NOW BUILDS
LIGHTWEIGHT MODELS OF THE WALL.
AND BRINGS THEM TO PLACES WHERE
THE WALL ONCE STOOD.
>> IN 2001, THERE WERE SOME WHO
THINK THIS IS THE ORIGINAL
BERLIN WALL.
THAT SIZE.
NO JOKE.
THEY HAVE NO IDEA AT ALL WHAT IT
WAS.
>> Reporter: ONE PERSON WHO
REMEMBERS VERY WELL THE WALL AND
THE DIVISION IS MARY ANN.
>> THESE HOUSES HERE THEY
BELONGED TO THE EAST.
OVER THERE IT WAS THE WEST.
>> Reporter: SHE GREW UP IN THE
EAST AND WOULD CROSS THE BRIDGE
TO VISIT HER GRANDPARENTS IN THE
WEST.
BUT WHEN THE WALL WAS BUILT, IT
BUY SECRETARIED THE BRIDGE AND
THE CITY, CUTTING HER OFF FROM
HER FAMILY.
>> RIGHT AFTERWARDS MY
GRANDFATHER DIED AND THEN MY
GRANDMOTHER HAD A STROKE AND
COULDN'T TAKE CARE OF HERSELF
ANYMORE.
SHE DIDN'T HAVE ANYONE BUT ME.
AND I COULD NOT GO OVER THE
BORDER.
IT WAS HORRIBLE FOR ME.
THEN SHE DIED AFTER A COUPLE OF
YEARS.
>> Reporter: FOR THE OLDER
GENERATION, THE WALL IS MAINLY A
SYMBOL OF FRUSTRATION.
>> THIS HEIGHT HERE, THE
ISOLATION AND THE HORROR OF IT.
IT MAKES YOU WANT TO DO THIS
SOMETIMES.
THE WALL SHOULD ABSOLUTELY NOT
STAY.
BUT YOU SHOULD KEEP A LITTLE
PIECE AS A MEMORY.
THAT'S THE RIGHT THING TO DO.
SO YOU SHOULD LEAVE THE EAST
SIDE GALLERY AS A MEMORIAL BUT
APART FROM THAT, WE DO NOT WANT
TO KNOW, SEE OR HEAR ANYTHING
ABOUT THIS WALL ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR MOST
BERLINERS INCLUDING THE YOUNGER
GENERATION, THE WALL HAS BECOME
A SYMBOL FOR FREEDOM.
AND THE FIGHT TO KEEP THE WALL
CONTINUES IN A DISTINCTLY BERLIN
WAY.
FOR NOW, THE DEVELOPER AND THE
CITY ARE SEARCHING FOR A WAY TO
PRESERVE AS MUCH OF THE GALLERY
AS POSSIBLE BUT CONSTRUCTION OF
THE APARTMENT BUILDING WILL
CONTINUE.
>> YOU HAVE TO KEEP MEMORIAL
SITES ALIVE.
YOU HAVE TO GET PEOPLE TO PASS
ON EXPERIENCES ESPECIALLY ON TO
CHILDREN.
BUT THERE ALSO HAS TO BE
SOMETHING NEW.
>> Reporter: WITH SUCH A LONG
HISTORY, IT'S EASY TO FORGET
THAT BERLIN HAS ONLY BEEN THE
CAPITAL OF REEWEN MID GERMANY
FOR JUST OVER 20 YEARS.
IT'S STILL SEARCHING FOR ITS
IDENTITY, FINDING THE RIGHT MIX
OF NEW AND OLD.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
FORMER BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
MARGARET THATCHER DIED AT 87.
SHE TRANSFORMED BRITISH ECONOMIC
POLICY AND COLD WAR POLITICS IN
THE 1980's.
AND THE BODY OF AMERICAN
DIPLOMAT ANNE SMEDINGHOFF WAS
FLOWN BACK TO THE U.S.
SHE WAS ONE OF FIVE AMERICANS
KILLED SATURDAY IN A BOMBING IN
AFGHANISTAN.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK INSIDE
SYRIA, WITH A "FRONTLINE"
JOURNALIST WHO GAINED ACCESS TO
BOTH THE REBELS AND GOVERNMENT
TROOPS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.